Draft migration topic (#81)
kadena-docs/kadena-docs: docs/smart-contracts/install/migrate-pact5.md

---
title: Migrating to Pact 5
id: migrating-to-pact5
sidebar_position: 4
description: "Update your development environment and smart contracts to use the Pact 5 smart contract language and command-line interpreter."
---

# Migrating to Pact 5

The Pact programming language was designed to optimize the transactional logic in smart contracts executed in a resource-constrained blockchain environment.
Pact 5 represents a comprehensive refactoring of the Pact language and command-line interpreter that offers improvements in efficiency, performance, and ergonomics.
The improvements in Pact 5 ensure lower transaction costs, faster module loading, and enhanced testing and debugging capabilities.
To take advantage of these improvements, you need to update your development environment and smart contracts to use Pact 5.

> This article covers the basics of upgrading to Pact 5 and details some of the breaking changes that might require you to update and redeploy existing contracts or fix potential coding errors.

Reviewer: Somewhere maybe around here we should mention that Pact 5 goes live Feb 10.

## Preparing to migrate

Ideally, you should test any smart contracts you've written by installing Pact 5 locally before Pact 5 is released on the Kadena main production network.
If you install Pact 5 locally in your development environment, you can run all of your existing contract tests you've defined in REPL files using the Pact 5 binary to verify that they work as expected.
For information about installing the Pact 5 binary locally, see [/smart-contracts/install].

> You can also test existing smart contracts by deploying them on the Kadena test network.
> You can deploy contracts for testing with Pact 5 on the Kadena `testnet05` network, if you deploy before 7 February 2025.
> You can connect to the `testnet05` network by using the API node available at `api.testnet05.chainweb.com`.
> The `testnet05` network is a separate test network where Pact 5 runs on Chainweb nodes before being deployed on the `testnet04` network and the Kadena `mainnet01` network.
> Note that the `testnet05` network will be decommissioned and removed from service when the `testnet04` network is upgraded to use Pact 5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also deploy contracts for testing with Pact 5 on the Kadena `testnet05` network. This network will be decommissioned on 7 February, after `testnet04` is also upgraded to Pact 5 on 6 February. You can connect to the `testnet05` network by using the API node available at `api.testnet05.chainweb.com`.
```

Pact 5 will also be deployed by default on the `development` network that you can run locally beginning with the `chainweb-node` 2.27 release. 
After `chainweb-node` 2.27 is released, you can start a local development node to build and test contracts using Pact 5 by default.

## After upgrading to Pact 5

Most smart contracts written in Pact 4, or earlier, should be compatible with Pact 5 and continue to operate as expected without any issues. 

> However, some of the bug fixes that were found in earlier versions of Pact and corrected in the Pact 5 implementation might cause unexpected behavior in your contracts or require some type of modification to the contract code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some of the bugs that were found in earlier versions of Pact and corrected in the Pact 5 implementation might cause unexpected behavior in your contracts or require some type of modification to the contract code.
```

You can find details about new features and the types of issues you might encounter in the remainder of this document.

> At a minimum, you should expect to redeploy existing contracts on the Kadena main production network after Pact 5 is released on the Kadena `mainnet01` network.
> Pact 5 includes a new built-in function for redeploying contracts, so you can take advantage of reduced transaction costs and faster transaction execution with minimal migration steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redeploying existing contracts is not required to use Pact 5, but will decrease gas costs, because the newly deployed version will use the Pact 5 on-disk format. Pact 5 includes a new built-in function for doing this easily.
```

"Loaded module m, hash hha21FQe4BjRLJ4L5mfHLTBE18QhKFyf-hXlEF21g_Y"
"Installed capability"
```

To prevent mistakes, Pact 5 is more strict, disallowing this behavior: 

```pact
pact> (load "scratch/discreps/unmanaged-install.repl" true)
"Loading scratch/discreps/unmanaged-install.repl..."
Loaded module m, hash E4C8JfW1e6rIThBWNDw3GON0COvPQVqm3ZXOWT80iCI
scratch/discreps/unmanaged-install.repl:7:0: Install capability error: capability is not managed and cannot be installed: m.UNMANAGED
 7 | (install-capability (UNMANAGED))
   | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

### Acquiring module administrator privileges for operations

Pact requires module administrator privileges to be acquired before performing the following operations:

- Upgrading a module.
- Accessing or modifying a table.
- Acquiring capabilities using the `with-capability` function.

Pact 4 automatically attempts to acquire the module administrator privileges when executing these operations. 
To prevent contracts from accidentally executing privileged actions, Pact 5 no longer automatically acquires the module administrator privileges except in the case of upgrading a module. 

> To acquire module administrator privileges explicitly, you can use the new `acquire-module-admin` built-in function  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To acquire module administrator privileges explicitly, you can use the new `acquire-module-admin` built-in function.
```

(begin-tx)
(env-data {"admin":{"keys":["some-key"], "pred":"keys-all"}})
(define-keyset "admin" (read-keyset "admin"))

(module m g
  (defcap g () (enforce-guard (keyset-ref-guard "admin")))

  (defschema fooschema user:string balance:integer)
  (deftable foo:{fooschema})
  )

(create-table foo)
(commit-tx)

(begin-tx)
(env-sigs [{"key":"some-key", "caps":[]}])
; Admin is being acquired here automatically
(write m.foo "bob" {"user":"bob", "balance":10000000000000})
(commit-tx)
```

In this example, the administrator privileges are granted implicitly for the transaction that contains the `write` function, and the result that gives Bob a balance of 10000000000000 coins might be difficult to spot. 
In Pact 5, Bob must explicitly acquire the administrative rights for the module.
For example:

```pact
(acquire-module-admin m)
(write m.foo "bob" {"user":"bob", "balance":10000000000000})
```

By acquiring the administrative rights before sending the `(write m.foo "bob" {"user":"bob", "balance":10000000000000})` transaction, it's clearer that the code is performing an administrative operation. 
Note that this change doesn't affect module deployment or upgrade transactions.

> Module administrator privileges are granted automatically to deploy or redeploy a module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Module administrator privileges are requested automatically to redeploy a module.
```

```

In the Pact 5 output, the hash for the `m` module reflects the change in the dependencies. 
This change is required for integrity, because otherwise, modules with the same hash can behave differently.

## Changed or removed built-in functions

- `pact-version` was usable in the REPL and with the `/local` endpoint to determine the current Pact version. It was cut from Pact 5 due to time constraints.
- `enforce-pact-version` was usable in the REPL and with the `/local` endpoint to assert on the current Pact version. It was cut from Pact 5 due to time constraints.
- `list` was deleted from Pact 5 after it was deprecated with a warning and increased gas costs in Pact 4. `(list 1 2 3)` is equivalent to `[1 2 3]`.
- `decrypt-cc20p1305` and `validate-keypair` have been cut from Pact 5 due to time constraints and lack of users.
- `constantly` has changed in Pact 5. It now accepts exactly two arguments, and behaves as if it were `(lambda (x y) x)`.

## New built-in functions

The following functions are new in Pact 5.

- `do` is a new special form that you can use to sequence statements. For example:

  ```pact
  (do
    (enforce (= 1 2) "")
    (enforce (= 3 4) ""))
  ```

> - `acquire-module-admin` is a new function that you can use to explicitly acquire module administrator privileges as described in [Acquiring module administrator privileges for operations](#acquiring-module-administrator-privileges-for-operations).

Reviewer: Yeah this link was really missing from the Notion doc.

> - `static-redeploy` is a new function that you can use to redeploy existing modules into their Pact 5 format, making them cheaper and faster to load.
>    Note that the use of this function is not a privileged operation. Anyone can do it to any module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `static-redeploy` is a new function that you can use to redeploy existing modules into their Pact 5 format, making them cheaper and faster to load.
   Note that the use of this function is not a privileged operation. Anyone can do it to any module, and the module hash remains the same.
```

Reviewer: Just got clarity from Jose on he above.

## Request and result interface

In general, Pact 4 and Pact 5 command requests and command results can be parsed successfully by the Pact 5 parser as follows:

- Existing Pact 4 command requests can be parsed as Pact 5 commands, and Pact 5 command requests can be parsed as Pact 4 commands.

- Pact 4 command results can be parsed as Pact 5 command results.

- Successful Pact 5 command results can be parsed as Pact 4 command results. 

- Pact 5 command results with errors are not valid Pact 4 command results because the error format has changed. 
  Errors in Pact 5 include both a textual description of the error, and a hexadecimal error code to distinguish the exact error case. 
  The `pact` executable in Pact 5 can explain these error codes using the `--explain-error-code` option, but they can lack some more specific information from the textual error message. 
  For example:

  ```bash
  > pact --explain-error-code 0x0000000000000000
  Encountered failure in: PELexerError, caused by: LexicalError
  ```

## Gas changes

Because the Pact interpreter has been structurally changed, Pact 5 has different gas costs than Pact 4.

> Pact 5 is also provides more precise methods for determining the gas cost of certain built-in functions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pact 5 also utilizes more precise methods for determining the gas cost of certain built-in functions. 
```

> In practice, most gas costs are lower, but the only way to be sure your transactions still fit into the gas limits is to test them using Pact 5, either on running on `testnet05`, or locally in a local Pact 5 REPL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, most gas costs are lower, but the only way to be sure your transactions still fit into the gas limits is to test them using Pact 5, either by running on `testnet05`, or locally in a local Pact 5 REPL.
```

Reviewer: We could also try a backlink.

## Formal verification

The Pact 4 formal verification system is tightly coupled to the internal implementation of Pact 4. 
Because Pact 5 is a complete re-implementation of the Pact language and command-line interpreter, Pact 5 doesn't support the Pact 4 formal verification system.

> A new formal verification system compatible with to Pact 5 isn't available at this time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new formal verification system compatible with Pact 5 isn't available at this time.
```
